---
layout: post
title: On Startups, Day Jobs, and Impact
date: '2012-03-19T00:00:00-07:00'
tags:
- text
tumblr_url: http://blog.throughnothing.com/post/109460533809/on-startups-day-jobs-and-impact
---
It’s been about 5 months since I quit my day job and decided to plunge head-first into the world of startups. It’s been an amazing ride so far, and I know I’ve only begun to scratch the surface of what’s to come.Don’t get me wrong, I’ve been incredibly fortunate to have some great jobs with some incredibly intelligent and talented people. I’ve learned a lot along the way, and the experiences have been great. The breakneck pace of the past 5 months at crowdtilt, however, is something I hadn’t experienced before. It’s amazing how fast perspectives can change.With a small team (we’ve currently got 2 developers) everyone has lots of autonomy, responsibility, and most importantly (for me, at least) each person has the ability to have a huge impact on the business (and on people’s lives). Every person on the team is empowered to make decisions, move as quickly as possible, and really own the things they do. This is often lost at larger corporations, where there’s more beauracracy and processes to get in the way of what us developers really want to be doing (coding and getting things done ™). In this environment abstract teams own things, while people and individuality are lost. Thus far I’ve been really happy with our focus, our pace, and our ability to keep tedious processes and long decision-chains to a bare minimum.Ownership and impact are two things that I think are really big in a startup environment – in fact, they’re huge. To really own the tasks at hand while taking on the responsibility of getting them done and making the hundreds of small decisions that inevitably come with any project is really rewarding and also satisfying. When you are given the power to make these decisions it helps the company move faster, which is very exciting, but it also adds creativity and brainpower to the companies growth engine – after all, startups don’t just want instruction-followers, they want creators and doers.As we look to grow our team, we’re going to put a lot of focus on keeping these things in tact. We want to make sure everyone is empowered, self-motivated and has access to all the tools they need to do great work. We want to find people who have a passion for creating great things, thrive with autonomy, and want the opportunity to have a very large impact every single day.
