---
layout: post
title: Back to Keto in 2.5 Days
date: '2015-02-07T09:07:14-08:00'
tags:
- text
- health
- ketosis
tumblr_url: http://blog.throughnothing.com/post/110352258731/back-to-keto-in-25-days
---
I’m still working on my longer post discussing the history of my dietary journey, but for those who don’t know, I’ve currently been experimenting with a Ketogenic diet for the past ~1.5 years.  A ketogenic diet is one that is extremely low in carbohydrate (<30g a day for me on average) and pretty high in fat (generally > 65% of calories, if not closer to 85/90% for me).  Staying on this diet long enough will change your bodies main energy substrate from carb-burning to fat-burning, and your body will start producing ketones for energy from your fat cells.  This diet has a decent amount of science and logic behind it, but I don’t want to go into that too much here.  The best quick reference for more info on the ketogenic diet comes from Stephen Phinney and Jeff Volek’s wonderful book, The Art and Science of Low Carbohydrate Living, which I would highly encourage you to check out.I started “keto” back in September of 2013, and have really enjoyed it thus far.  Of course, there are certain occasions where I’ll splurge on carbs and get ‘knocked out’ of ketosis for a few days, or even a week at a time.  Being in ketosis is an interesting state;  it’s very easy and quick to fall out of it, but can take significantly longer to get back into it.  More simply: our bodies can quickly turn on the carb-burning machinery, but the fat-burning machinery takes longer to boot back up.This brings me to my main topic for this post.  On my recent trip to Paris and Amsterdam, I had a few too many carbs.  I generally have no problem staying keto even on vacation, because I feel so much better on the diet, and I even did pretty well on this trip, but there were some necessary carb binges involved (Eiffle Tower dinner dessert, Chez Janou chocolate mousse, etc.).  I managed to stay away from grains, but, alas, I was not in ketosis when I got back home (verified by urine sticks and my ketonix breath meter).24 Hour (Fat) FastI decided to try something new that I haven’t really read about or heard much about anywhere else.  Often if I think I’ve had too many carbs, or want to make sure I jump back into ketosis rather quickly, I will just do a 24-hour fast to kickstart my body into ketone production.  Even with that approach, it can still take a few days to fully get back into ketosis.This time I wanted to try something a little different and see how it played out.  I decided to try a 24 hour fast where I could eat all the fat I wanted, but could not eat any carbs or protein.  Basically this means I could have coconut oil, cream, butter, lard, olive oil, and similar things like that.  I still consider it a fast, because you can’t really make full meals out of those things, but they can help satiate you if you get hungry during a 24-hour fast.  My go-to for this trial was a bulletproof coffee whenever I’d want a little something.  This consists of coffee, cream, butter, and coconut oil.  I generally adjust the ratios of these to taste and don’t really measure things out.  Suffice it to say, I use a decent amount of all the fats :)2.5 DaysAfter my 24-hour fat-fast, I resumed a strict ketogenic diet.  Usually during this phase, I’ll keep my vegetables and salads lower as well, just to further restrict carbs.  In this case, I had almost no vegetables the next day, just things like sausage, eggs, bacon, butter, coconut milk, etc..I measured myself half a day later, and I was back to producing ketones.  I could mostly tell without measuring, as my brain-fog lifts, my energy levels go up, and I feel less groggy overall, but the measurements are a good verification and quantification.So, what have I learned?  It seems that, for me at least, a “fat-fast” can be a viable alternative to a 24-hour fast to still ramp back up on ketone production.  Coconut oil is probably a key ingredient here as well, as it’ll kick start your body into making ketones.  I’ll probably use this approach again in the future as it seemed to work pretty well.  Of course, once you’re back in ketosis, fasting for 24 hours is not much of a problem at all as hunger largely stays at bay.
