---
layout: post
title: Government Mandated Debt Forgiveness
date: '2015-02-01T12:57:51-08:00'
tags:
- text
- economics
- croatia
- debt
tumblr_url: http://blog.throughnothing.com/post/109805890399/government-mandated-debt-forgiveness
---
The Croatian government, in an interesting move, decided this week to cancel the debts of its poorest citizens.Starting Monday, thousands of Croatia’s poorest citizens will benefit from an unusual gift: They will have their debts wiped out. Named “fresh start,” the government scheme aims to help some of the 317,000 Croatians whose bank accounts have been blocked due to their debts.I haven’t heard of anything like this before, but its certainly an interesting approach.  It appears the Croatian government is doing this in attempts to boost the economy.  Full details have been hard to find, but the telegraph reports that:Around 2.1bn kuna (£20m) worth of bad debts are expected to be written off by creditors who have signed up to the scheme. None will be refunded for their losses.This makes it sound like banks and businesses involved had to sign up for the ‘scheme’, and yet will not be refunded for their losses.  This begs the question, if they signed up for the scheme, presumably voluntarily, why could they not have forgiven these debts without government involvement?  I suspect there must be some government supplement or tax benefit involved, but cannot find specifics.Tha Washington Post article linked above states:Although the program is expected to cost up to 210 million Croatian kuna ($31 million), according to Austrian press agency APA, the Croatian government expects economic long-term benefits that will outweigh the short-term investment. Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic has convinced multiple cities, public and private companies, the country’s major telecommunications providers, as well as nine banks to clear some of their citizens of their debt. The government will not refund the companies for their losses.So the government expects the program to cost $31 million, which is close to the amount of debt forgiveness that will be happening, but yet they are not refunding companies for their losses?  Something doesn’t seem to add up.I’m a huge fan of eliminating debt, but I’m also a huge fan of voluntary exchange and fewer government mandates.  In this case the water is a little murky, but it seems something doesn’t add up.  Luckily, the amounts are relatively small for the Croatian economy, so this should mostly be a wash.  The debt elimination will be a good thing, but hopefully it’s not just transferred back to the public as government debt or deficit financing.
