---
layout: post
title: "City Life - DC"
date: 2011-07-15
comments: true
categories:
    - life
    - moving
---

We’ve moved.  For the first time in my life I now live in a big city.  It’s only
been a week, but so far I’m loving it.  We moved into the Dupont area of DC last
Saturday, and have been getting settled in all week.  I most enjoy taking Belle
(our white Maltise) on multiple walks during the day throughout the city.
Night-time cruises on my bike have also been great as the weather has been
perfect all week.

Our living space is a little bit smaller than before, but I consider that a
bonus.  It forces us to re-evaluate our possessions, and find what is necessary.
We got rid of a bed, a dresser, and downsized our wardrobes and kitchen things.
It actually feels like we have more space, and getting rid of old junk is very
freeing.

As for the city life, there are so many people out and about all the time , and
so much going on, it can sometimes seem like overload.  Lucky for us, Rock Creek
Park provides a quiet getaway from the hustle and bustle of the city when
needed.  We have been enjoying night time strolls along the Dupont area, and
just wandering aimlessly to get to know the area.  I’m excited for what the
future holds here.

It took Zeus and Belle a few days to get adjusted to the new place, but I think
they are both getting pretty situated now.  Zeus no longer hides in the kitchen
cabinets all day, and Belle already knows how to find her way back home after a
good walk.

